---
title: A Small Review
layout: post
slug: retrospective
---
here's the summary paragraph.

# A Small Retrospective

## Why am I doing this? Where have I gotten to? Where am I going?
If this is the first post you're reading, then you may be asking, "Quo vadis?": "Whither goest thou?"
A review is in order. 

I have, off and on, for several years, wanted to learn more about generating functions.
They're used to reach sophisticated conclusions,
from combinatorics to closed-form formulas for important functions, yet reasoning about them often only needs high-school algebra.
I'd read a tutorial, marvel at the reasoning and conclusion, but then get distracted -- *squirrel!* -- and discover,
when I returned to them, that I didn't remember a thing.
They never turned into tools in my mathematical toolbox: 
if I had a math problem, I never thought, "Hey! I could use generating functions to solve this."
To move past this, I began afresh, and, instead of just reading about generating functions or even working problems at the ends of chapters,
I began blogging about them, writing daily posts about what I'd just learned.
This feels analogous to the step in language-learning of moving from passive understanding --
being able to read books and understand what someone else is saying -- to active use --
speaking my own thoughts and opinions and making myself understood.

"That's nice," you say. "Does it work? Can you now do something with generating functions? Has anything stuck?"

## Using generating functions
I think this approach *is* working. Let me illustrate with a simple example -- summing the integer series.
I'll break it down into steps, and do each step without hunting down a proof on the web
or reproducing something I found in a textbook.

As a warmup, let me sum the integers. Here are the steps:

1) Write down a generating function for the integers themselves. This is a function whose polynomial expansion,

$$1 + 2x + 3x^2 + 4x^3 + ... (n+1)x^n + ... = \sum_{n \geq 0} (n+1) x^n$$

has the integers as coefficients.

I can derive the formula for this: $$G(x) = \frac{1}{(1-x)^2)}$$ by just differentiating what I've seen called "the fundamental equation,"

$$F(x) = 1 + x + x^2 + ... + x^k + ... = \frac{1}{(1-x)}$$

2) I need sums of the coefficients of $G(x)$.
For this, I'll make *another* generating function whose coefficients are the smus of the terms of $G(x)$ .

$$S(x) = 1 + (1+2)x + (1+2+3)x^2 + ... (1+2+...+k) x^{k-1} + ...$$

This requires a trick. 
I've now done this a lot, so I can see that I can get this by adding an infinite number of copies of $G(x),
with each successive copy shifted one place further to the right. In other words,

$$S(x) = G(x) + xG(x) + x^2G(x) + ... = G(x)(1 + x + x^2 + ...) = G(x)F(x)$$

This should work for anything, 
so I can get a generating function for sums of successive coefficients of any generating function 
just by multiplying it by the fundamental equation.

Thus, the sums of the consecutive integers are just the coefficients of the polynomial expansion of $\frac{1}{(1-x)^3}$ !

### Extracting a closed-form for the coefficients.
3) Finally, I want to see an equation for the coefficients. The notation for 
"Show me the coefficient of $x^n$ in the polynomial $f(x)$ " comes from Ken Iverson's APL,
and looks like this: $[x^n]f(x)$ . For example, $[x^n]F(x) = 1$ and $[x^n]G(x) = (n+1)$ .

So what is $s(n) = [x^n]S(x)$ ? For this, I can pull out the negative binomial, like this:

$$s(n) = [x^n] S(x) = [x^n] (1-x)^{-3} = [x^n] \sum {(-3) \choose n} (-x)^n = [x^n] \sum {(n+3-1) \choose n} (-1)^n (-x)^n$$

$$= [x^n]\sum \frac{(n+2)(n+1)}{2} x^n = \frac{(n+2)(n+1)}{2}$$

Ah, but wait! Remember that $S(x) = 1 + (1+2)x + (1+2+3)x^2 + ...$ . 
That is, the sum of the first $n$ integers is $s(n-1)$, not $s(n)$ !

Well, okay then. the function we want is just $t(n) = s(n-1) = \frac{(n+1)n}{2}$, which you know from high-school algebra:
add the first and last terms and multiply by half the number of terms -- what Gauss figured out as a schoolchild.

### A harder example: summing the squares.
Let's sum successive squares $1 + 4 + 9 + 16 + ...$ , again, step by step.

1) Find the OGF for the successive squares:

$$G(x) = 1 + 4x + 9x^2 + ... = \frac{1+x}{(1-x)^3}$$

I can get this with a tiny bit of calculus, the same way I got $G(x)$ in the previous example.

2) Find the OGF for the sums of the terms in the power series for $G(x)$.

$$S(x) = G(x)F(x) = \frac{(1+x)}{(1-x)^4}$$

3) Find a formula for $$s(n) = [x^n] S(x)$$

#### a tiny observation about $[x^n]$ .
If $[x^n] f(x) = a_n$, what's $[x^n] x f(x)$ ?
That's not hard. Notice that if $f(x) = a_0$ , a constant,
$x f(x) = a_0 x^1$ . 
In other words, $[x^1] x f(x) = a_0$ .

In general, 

$$[x^n] x f(x) = a_{n-1} = [x^{n-1}] f(x)$$

It's pretty easy to jump from that to this

$$[x^n] x^k f(x) = a_{n-k} = [x^{n-k}] f(x)$$ .

#### back to summing squares

Finally, I need to find a closed-form formula for the coefficient of $x^n$ in $[x^n] \frac{1+x}{(1-x)^4}$ .

This is just the sum of the terms

$$s(n) = [x^n] (1-x)^{-4} + [x^n] x (1-x)^{-4} = [x^n] (1-x)^{-4} + [x^{n-1}] (1-x)^{-4}$$

Using the negative binomial again, I get this:

$$s(n) = \frac{((n+3)(n+2)(n+1) - (n+2)(n+1)(n))}{3!} = \frac{(2n+3)(n+2)(n+1)}{6}$$

Once again, I really want

$$t(n) = s(n-1) = \frac{(2n+1)(n+1)n}{6}$$

Is this right? I can check a few values

$$t(1) = 1^1 = 1 = 6/6$$ ,

$$t(2) = (1/6) \cdot 5 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 = 5 = 1+4$$ ,

$$t(3) = (1/6) \cdot 7 \cdot 4 \cdot 3 = 14 = 1 + 4 + 9$$ ,

and so on.

## In summary

So, I've shown how to use generating functions to derive general expressions for something 
I don't know another derivation for: the sum of consecutive squares.
If you want to try sometihng fancier, try using the generating function for odd squares, from the previous post, 
to derive a general expression for: the sum of consecutive *odd* squares.
